Hi. Thanks. You guys are the tail end of our estimates.
Not the tail end of our meeting, but the tail end of our estimates hearings.
We like to do a little loose end tying up after hearing from
our ministers, any hangover questions, of which there are.
I just wonder, given that we've sort of got a variety of
markets, whether you want to do a little introductory remark before we hand
over-
Perhaps if I do some-
... to the minister.
I'll try and keep it really-
Yeah, that would be great
... thank you. Look, good afternoon. Long time no see.
First of all, just introduce Anna Clark, who's our Deputy Secretary for
Labor Science, and Enterprise. She's just been appointed in the last couple of
months. And Ingrid Baylis, who's currently acting in Immigration,
but has been appointed to our service delivery area for everything
non-immigration. So she'll start in that shortly.
And Deputy Secretary for Immigration will be Andy Milne, who's currently at
ACC, so he starts with us very shortly. So there's quite a bit of change.
These are faces that you will see
in the committee.
Okay.
But there's obviously
the biometric capability might be one that you want to come back to.
But I did want to just highlight there are a few other areas that you may want to
touch on as well.
Yeah.
In Immigration, obviously from a policy perspective, there's been a lot of change
and a lot of implementation of that.
We've really also been trying to keep it in touch with our processing times.
When we last met in, I think it was January, things were in a really good place.
Things are still in a pretty good place, although AWV and students
aren't quite where they were. We're doing our best to get those back on track.
We're happy to talk more about that.
We've also got one more visa onto ADEPT since then, family of a temp worker,
so that program is continuing to get new visas onto that
platform. Workplace Relations, this morning you heard about a lot of
legislative change. From employment services side, there's been
quite a lot of increase in demand there.
But we have managed to maintain our service quality,
in terms of timeliness and customer satisfaction.
But happy to talk about the inspectorate and dispute resolution.
And then ACC, our role there is really in the policy role,
and our main role over the last while has been supporting the turnaround plan.
So that's just some of the areas that I'm very happy to talk to.
But over to you, Madam Chair.
Great. Thank you very much. We have an opening question from Carl Bates.
Thanks, Chair, and thanks for coming back today, and appreciate it's
been a bit of a challenging week. I'm interested to dig more into this
biometric system, as you will appreciate.
So as I understand it, we're writing off, as a government, $31.2
million for this system which doesn't work.
Immigration went
to the minister to try and get the cap of funding
for whole of life increased,
in March
last year.
That didn't happen, but you've still been able to keep the cap,
or the costs within the cap, through some in and out
transfers, described in the report as creative accounting.
Can you give us detail on what
transfers were made to avoid it having to go back to Cabinet?
So just to clarify the numbers, you're correct,
31.2 is the amount that's been written off.
The total cost of the project was 33.4.
The difference is operating. So there was a small amount of operating expenditure,
but the majority was capital, just to clarify that.
Okay.
So the overall amount was 33.4.
I guess the key area
decision that was made was around, there were originally two projects.
One
focused on the core biometric capability, and one focused on
in-person enrollment, which is the fingerprinting
for new refugees and so on. So there were originally
two projects,
but they were brought together. I think that was in 2020.
I'll check the timeline.
And then they were separated again at one point as well.
Yeah.
And so that
was,
I guess, what was described in the report as creative accounting.
That's exactly what the public service commissioner's review will now need to look
into, is how that decision was made, and why.
But how did Immigration need to go to Cabinet
to get the whole of life cap increased,
was not successful in that,
yet still was able to continue the project?
As I understand it, there were cost transfers
out of the
project to allow or enable that to happen.
Well, the
agreement of the whole of life cost at that point was 35
million.
Yeah.
And the
total expenditure has been under that 35 million.
So the request was to increase the
cap to 40 million, which didn't happen.
So how did you continue the project at that point if the cap was not
able to be increased? If at that point Immigration was saying,
"We need the cap to be increased in order to continue the project."
It wasn't.
You don't get the increase in the cap.
Mm.
But the project somehow miraculously continues.
Well,
I guess that is where the change in separating out-
But that was in 2020
... uh, no, that was the merger.
Oh, the merger.
Oh.
So you then re-separated them out.
Correct.
Right.
Oh.
In terms of
Immigration NZ's
approach going forward,
is there anything that you can do-
Mm
... to save costs by being more efficient,
taking on board AI faster, doing anything in order to
reduce what's ultimately going to be the cost of this on visa
holders are both paying for the sunk
cost of this project that's gone nowhere and whatever you end up doing,
to replace it. And I ask this question as someone who's
created software, selling it in the market, and understands that
every dollar of cost of development ultimately
has to be factored into the price someone pays.
So that's a big concern to me and certainly my constituency.
So the short answer is yes, absolutely.
Let me go through a few different components.
On the
biometric capability itself, we're obviously going through the process now
of what are the best options going forward.
Things have changed a lot since, uh, 2019.
Originally, there's now all of government services.
We'll be looking closely at those.
So we'll be looking for absolutely the least cost replacement
that, um, fits the bill. So that's one part.
The Our Future Services program is the major service
change that's underway
that will be reducing cost in the system.
So this is moving all visas onto the ADEPT
platform, which is the modern platform.
And that, um, has savings from two main sources.
One is cost savings from getting off legacy
platforms.
And then the second is from efficiencies, which does allow lower
levels of staff to be able to complete the same volumes.
So that program is underway. As I said, um, there's been
a family of a temp worker on recently, and that's programmed to
continue out. So that is a core source over the coming years of
savings. Then there is,
more generally, focus on productivity.
We are looking a lot across all the different visa
products and how we're monitoring productivity, how we
can improve that. That does go to training, to leadership, to
ways of working. Be happy for Ingrid and Jenny to talk more
about that. It's a key area. And then as you say, there's what else, what are
the other tools, what are the AI tools, and we're exploring various pilots
in that as well.
Appreciate there's been some movement in personnel, uh, and
appreciate that there is a
review process that is going to be undertaken.
But in your view at this point ,
are you aware of anyone who raised a question
about the accounting and
with concern around how the finances for this project
was being managed, uh, that either raised a question or has left?
And in your view, did anyone leave in order to
avoid accountability around this project?
So I'm not aware on either account.
I
wasn't that close to
the project.
In the last week, we have checked our formal systems to see whether
any concerns were raised through the formal channels, and we haven't
found anything there. But that's, of course, just one source.
So I'm not aware on either of those, but it is what the review will be digging
into.
Mm-hmm.
Yep.
Yeah, thanks.
That's okay.
Yeah, thanks. Yeah, Nick, just following on from Carl's
questions. So given you've been there since 2023 in a
deputy secretary role-
Correct
... do you feel personally any accountability in this space?
Look, I was part of the executive team, but as the review showed,
a lot of this was outside standard channels.
I had limited association with the project.
I was aware that it was in a troubled state,
and
was
pleased ultimately when Suzanne decided that actually that was
the time to
terminate the project.
Hold on. You were aware it was in a troubled state.
Did you do anything at that point in your role?
Well,
at that stage, the chief executive, Carolyn, was
monitoring it very closely.
She was doing everything she could to get it over the line.
There were
lots of people, lots of senior people, the executives involved.
I wasn't involved, and I am closely-
Okay. Thank you.
Metrika.
Thanks, Chair. Given the statement you've just made, Nick, about how
closely the previous chief executive was monitoring it-
Mm-hmm
... it baffles me-
Mm
... that the report was provided to part of the
team in March,
sorry, in April, uh, and didn't land on the minister's
desk until Friday. Those two statements don't
match up for me.
Mm.
Look, we got that wrong. At the time, I was
basically 100% working on the fuel response.
So I didn't engage with the report when it came in in early April.
The team
felt it was better to have a response at the same
time as providing it to the minister.
That was not the right decision, but that was-
And appreciate you were fully over the cost of fuel and
that that was important for New Zealand.
But this must raise some serious questions about
the next level of leadership.
To suggest that the previous chief executive was, in
your words, all over it-
Mm
... yet it sat in MB without the minister
being aware- For two months
So just to be clear, you're talking about the review, right?
The re-
Yeah. So I was in the role when the review came in, in April.
Yeah. But I'm talking more as the culture of the organization.
Your comment was the previous chief executive had been all over the project.
Like this was not-
I think the previous chief executive of Immigration New Zealand, I think is-
Of MB.
Of MB. Yeah, sorry. No.
In the last...
There were real attempts to get the project over the line.
What happened was,
there were defects, as they're called, and
it looks like they were reducing them, but every time they
reduced some defects, some new ones were created.
But this was post this, right? This was last year.
The review arrives in April. It sits on the desk.
Two months.
Until Friday last week.
Banging the table.
Sorry.
So look, I accept we got that wrong.
Yeah.
As I said, the team felt they should work out what's the best
response before reporting to ministers. That was the wrong call.
We've had a conversation about that as our leadership
team about expectations of bringing
that sort of material to ministers immediately.
So appreciate that, and thank you for having that conversation with your team.
Is it going to go further than that?
I would imagine if this was any other organization in New Zealand, New
Zealanders business leaders sitting out there would be looking at this going,
"Surely the accountability is going to go further than a conversation that
we got that wrong." And I appreciate the acknowledgement and appreciate you taking
it on the chin, but it just doesn't seem like the language and
the seriousness of this is really being understood and going
to flow through to real accountability.
So look, I've accepted that we got that wrong, that we, and
I've apologized to the minister for not bringing it to their attention
sooner.
I've undertaken with my team that we need to make sure that we are
bringing those sort of things to ministers, and that is my response to that.
Yeah. Supplementary, Vanessa Wienrich.
Thanks so much for coming along.
Look, back in 2024, there was a Beswick report into Immigration
New Zealand, and what was disturbing to me at the time about
that was that staff warnings were ignored.
And we were told
that these things have changed, that the
culture of the organization had been looked at and you're listening to staff.
And then in this report,
it mentions that people
who raised issues or attempted to raise issues
were moved sideways or moved out, moved on.
The culture of that within Immigration New Zealand speaks to a
disrespect of
staff and a level of not only disrespect to staff,
actually disrespect to the New Zealand public and elected officials that they
are working with. That they are actively
hiding things that are
unfavorable and moving
people on.
How are you going to address those cultural problems within Immigration
New Zealand? What plans do you have to improve or to
seek out who are the-- Are they the same people that potentially are
working within the organization, or is it a different level of problem?
The findings of the review are obviously over the lifetime of the project, which
does go back seven years.
Yeah.
So there'll be an element of
historic things here as well. But nevertheless, I was really concerned by that.
Well, again, we've been talking about with the leadership teams and
particularly with Andy, will be starting in the role very
soon. Is how do we
take this as a time to build that culture?
In all my messaging, I've been talking about the importance of being able to
speak up and be heard and
we will be doing something on the culture side.
We're working through what that might look like, particularly with Andy starting in
the next month. So I absolutely agree that we need to
do more to ensure that that has made its way through
the organization.
Thank you. Just a question on the broader policy
work. You talked earlier, this is about injury prevention,
health and safety, ACC. For a number of years we've sort of
followed along with that. Who does injury prevention sit with?
You say you've got the policy teams that sit within MB.
At what point are you
stepping back strategically and going, "Where does this sit?
Who's taking this? Who's responsible?
Is this better with..."
How's that conversation going in terms of capability
each other, how we're being really clear about who delivers what.
Yeah. Especially, sorry, and just noting today, and the reason I really want to ask
this is we talked a lot about roll cages and quad bikes and that,
and WorkSafe said, "Yeah, we've made a video. It's really cool.
You should watch it." But also ACC said, "We have programs through injury
prevention where we fund Farm Strong and various other
safer farms and other organizations." So it's clearly in both organizations work
being done in that space that I'm not necessarily saying they're conflicting or
competing, but
where's that kind of joined up conversation?
Sure. So, that's a really good question because there used
to be a relationship between ACC and
WorkSafe around injury prevention, and that's changed recently.
Yep.
We have got
in our branch workplace relations and safety policy that covers three
areas of interrelated policy. So it's employment relations
in the employment system, it's health and safety policy, and it's
ACC policy.
Mm-hmm.
I think what we have a really important role in that policy area
to do is to bring together ACC and
WorkSafe,
acknowledging that they each have their separate work programs and slightly
different purposes. So ACC is an insurance scheme.
It's about injury prevention and rehabilitation
across the whole
of the country, whereas WorkSafe is related to work health and
safety. But there are areas where they overlink, as you
pointed out with quad bikes and roll cages.
And what we need to do is work better with them
to bring together and make sure we actually have a cohesive
approach. And it's not just their public outreach pieces,
it's us thinking about our policy settings as well to make sure
that
we've got them right to be able to enable them to do their
enforcement and their guidance and their education work.
And just as a supplement to that, and I'm not trying to be provocative, but a
little bit of a chicken and egg kind of situation where like who does the
work first? Is there a mechanism for, "Hey, you guys,
we're actually already doing this," or, "ACC is already doing this." Do you have
that kind of continuity of service, or is it almost a completely third
arm of the whole thing where you've got ACC, WorkSafe, and then your policy
team within MB, and they're not actually
...
So
you're right in pointing out we don't have a coordinated work program
across the three of us. We have tried to do that in the
past, and I think it's something that we could do better.
We've had a little bit of a success, but we haven't been able
to embed it so it really takes off.
Mm.
So I think what you see now is
we are focused on the ACC amendment, sorry, the Health and
Safety Amendment-
Yeah
... Bill and doing work there.
And WorkSafe and ACC, through their data, through their
outreach, through the intel and insights, they're getting it going.
Actually, we think there's something here and we're going to do some information
and education. We're going to do some guidance.
We're going to support
people with information.
And we're focused here on this particular bill.
So I think going forward, there is definitely the
opportunity for us to work closer, particularly around, say, injury
prevention, where we have those overlapping roles, and make sure that
we're more coordinated.
Cool. Thank you. Pamji.
Yeah. Actually, I want to go back to the previous topic and want to know, do
you know how much of that $33 million, which is basically
sunk, went to external providers?
Do you know that?
Yes.
13.7 million went to NEC as
the main vendor, and 5.3 million went to
other ICT service providers. And then the remainder of
14.4 was MB's internal and contractor staff.
Okay. So is there a way that
you can take some action to recover that money?
No. The contracts with
NEC in particular was
like many IT contracts, where payments are
related to milestones that are met through the
process. And those milestones had been
met. There was a system that
almost worked,
and it was those milestones that had been met.
It was at the last hurdle that it wasn't, so we were unable to recover
because they had met the milestones up to that point.
Interesting.
So we've got a supplementary from Carl, and then from Vanessa, and then from Tiano.
Thanks.
And you too. Okay.
Thanks, Chair. Just picking up on those numbers.
So if my quick math does me
correct, there's between 14 and 15 million that was
internal MB
team costs or contractors. Of that number, how
much of that was actual software developers, people
really working on the tech versus
PR,
management, allocation of overheads, a nice place to park
money?
Look, I don't know the answer.
I'm sure we can give you a full breakdown.
Okay. Well, we'll put that as a follow-up question.
There would be a lot of business analysts, business side
people. A lot of the core software was by NEC, but there would've been some of that
as well.
Okay. So we'll ask that as a follow-up.
But the follow-on from that is,
will you review from an MB perspective,
if this project had been
undertaken by a commercial entity
that had accountability in a different way about how money is spent,
whether this would've been
more cost-effectively delivered
than the spend that's
occurred in the way it's been managed by MB?
That's not currently something I'm planning to
review. I'm focused on now what's the
operating of the PSC's review, which will look into the integrity including around
the financials, but then what is the next solution?
Well, yeah, given you're going to go into that next solution-
That's right
... it might be a question worth asking.
So-
And so we've got a supplementary. Can we keep them for one or two supps each,
because we're going to run out of time. Vanessa.
So on the spend on that, 13.4
that was internal or contractor, can you tell us how much of that was consultants?
Not
off the top of my head, but again, we can provide you-
Is that information you'd be able to provide us?
I would've thought so.
And how much was spent on the governance
arrangements?
Again, we'll give you as much of a breakdown of the full
33.4 as we can.
Great. Thank you.
Right. Tiano Tuiona.
Yeah. I was wondering about-
The project itself and the expense project
interoperability. So was this project going to be able
to work with
Five Eyes countries in particular in terms of being able to share biometric
data with them? Was that the intention?
Mm.
And if so, how much
of the cost was sunken for that aspect?
The primary purpose was for it to be our core
repository of biometric information to replace the existing system.
So that was the purpose. Now it's also true that we do
share information with Five Eyes countries, but
the
purpose of the investment was to replace the existing system with a new
upgraded system. So yeah, there was no particular-
So there wasn't a specific cost.
So for example,
folks won't have to go to the States to see how
interoperable the systems would be
presumably.
I don't believe so. I'm probably stretching my deep
understanding of the project, but I wouldn't believe so.
And we can
come back and if that's not the case.
Yeah, if you could get some clarity around that, that would be...
Because it's a big amount of money.
Mm-hmm.
Figuring if it
ended up in Canada or the States or whatever.
We have very little time left. We have one supplementary from Phil and one
from Pamjit, so if we could round that off.
Do you think there's a culture in the department of managing up?
By that, I mean-
Mm-hmm
... with department
manages its ministers and controls the flow of
information up-
Mm-hmm
... and manages processes-
... in the perceived interests of the department.
Because that's-
Wonderful
... I would suggest that's what the report-
Says
... suggests strongly.
So I don't believe that's a widespread culture across MBIE.
Many of our ministers are very pleased with
the
advice and support they receive from MBIE.
We can always make improvements with how we are doing that, but I don't believe
that's something that is
across the department.
Obviously, this raises real concerns and this is
exactly what the PSC's review will look into as to what happens
here.
So I don't believe it's systematic, but at the same time,
I will be, and have already discussed with the leadership team,
to the earlier points around the review, is making sure we
are always making sure we're fully reporting
to ministers and that is an important part of being a public servant.
Pamjit?
Yeah. So I want to understand from you what kind of consequences or
disciplinary actions are there for any staff or officials, those
who withhold red flags. And I'm asking this to understand
if those consequences are strong enough
or something needs to be done.
Well,
a couple of points.
From an employment point of view, there are consequences all the way up to
dismissal. There are warnings would be at the lower end up to
dismissal. So those are the full suite of options available,
and that will all depend on what the
independent review finds. It'll depend on
were there clear breaches of the code of conduct, all of those sorts of things
which would need to be substantiated, and then
those potential consequences would be considered.
Thank you very much. We've reached the end of our time.
Okay.
Appreciate you shedding some more light-
Thank you
... and detail on the situation.
And my one other little question.
Yeah.
Appreciate it.
Thank you.
You two.
Two here.
Little two in there.
Mr. Fleming just joined us.
And then-
Hmm?
Mr. Fleming just joined
... then you do name.
To accept the
offer to become a panelist.
Yeah. So if you could just turn your camera on and your audio
on.
Yeah.
Wonderful.
Perfect. Can you hear and see me?
Yes. Can I just say in advance,
for all
submitters, that the committee has read your submission,
and please do not name any individuals during your hearing.
But also leave time for questions.
We have 10 minutes with you, and you can start now.
Perfect. Thank you so much for making the time to hear from me.
Again, my name is Tanya Dunston. I'm the CEO and founder of Ponsonby Chambers.
My interest pertaining to the legislation throughout my
accomplice,
pertaining to the safety of New Zealand is paramount, not
only as an Australian but also having spent a lot of time in New Zealand, founded
my company there. And have become a bit of a resource for people to
reach out to me, particularly those who deem to be victims of
judicial abuse or systemic abuse or fundamental
mishandling. So the submissions I have primarily are
two-part. One is the legislation, because obviously the paperwork is important,
but also the practical application of that so it is not undermined,
overruled, or easily obstructed throughout court proceedings.
So looking at the Modern Slavery Bill, the primary
issue that I can see is the
ambiguity between discerning what is human
trafficking and what is the modern slavery
criteria. So at a point where trafficking ends
and slavery begins. And I know with the United Nations' definition of
exploitation, it is not as restrictive as New
Zealand has chosen to be,
particularly removing the financial exploitation of
children as a basis that is not legally covered, which is of
significant concern to me. I understand the Trafficking Amendment
Bill has recently included that there
needed to be an element of deception in order for a trafficking
victim to have been trafficked, meaning that if someone was
notified that they were a trafficked individual, they then lost their legal
basis to have any recourse or safety measures, which
is hugely unjust, and certainly not
compliant with the United Nations protocol that New Zealand had
ratified, albeit not in its entirety.
So looking-- Thank you for your patience with me.
Thank you.
So my concerns with regards to the Modern Slavery
Bill is how it will clearly be separated between the
trafficking legislation and how Parliament can
ensure that the intention of the bill is upheld and not
obstructed. Another issue pertaining to that is
immigration has a policy that it will not issue
visas to victims of trafficking, and I imagine it would be exactly
the same as
slaves or people that have been exploited financially,
on the basis that if they are prevented from
deportation, they waive any right of recognition
of their victimhood. Which I'm aware of because
Australian citizens who have been trafficked in New Zealand are unable to receive
a trafficking visa on the very basis that they will not be
deported if they don't have that visa.
Which is the very definition of discrimination prohibited under
Section 21 of the Human Rights Act 1993,
or their citizenship. And then when I've had discussions
with MSD, which is now up at the Social Security Authority
Appeal Board, discussing how people can be eligible for
compensation and safety measures, including therapy,
for being trafficked. If a police officer does not issue a
certificate substantiating the fact that someone has been
trafficked, then they are not eligible for any
assistance or care. And I'm concerned that the Modern Slavery Bill will have
the same concern, and worse, that victims are fearful of speaking
out because people that are being trafficked and
exploited on different farms
are told or basically
threatened, so they can blow a whistle, for example, on a
kiwi farm, and then be told that now they'll be exploited.
So they do not have any of the whistleblowing safeguards that
should be enforced, which further encourages the
systemic abuse to keep people silent.
And that is the concern I have with the majority of the legislation through
Parliament, that whether it's intentional or
unintentional, it appears to be designed to fail
the public in human rights for the sake of maximum profit, and that might
seem a little bit cynical, but I have- I've been
experiencing some pretty significant human rights violations for the
best part of nearly nine years now,
and I do not accept the misconception
that systems are broken. I believe they are deliberately designed to fail the
people, which is why it is important to have these open discussions
to speak to people, quite frankly.
If you've read my written submissions, you can see the basis of my concern.
You can see some of the precedent decisions that I've raised.
Please ask me any questions you have regarding this.
I will be making written submissions in the Australian Parliament
also for their legislation that is being reconsidered at the same time,
and I have concurrent proceedings in United Nations.
So these matters will absolutely be brought to light on a global
platform because that transparency is essential for
public safety, not just for New Zealand citizens, but anyone that happens to
be hopefully traveling through or choosing to
stay for as long as they want and are legally entitled to.
So if you would like to ask me any questions, please.
Thank you very much, Taz. Appreciate your submission.
I think it doesn't appear that we have any questions around the table.
I'm just going to-
Oh, yeah, there is. There is
two minutes, so go for gold, Camilla.
Thank you. Thanks very much, Tanya, for your submission and your interest
in this bill, and your support for the underlying concepts.
I just had a question. I know you referenced the
definitions
section in your written submission also today to us,
and I know that you referenced a previous member's bill
that had looked at those definitions of trafficking.
Yep.
That's been, I think, for the majority, incorporated into the Crimes
Amendment Act, which is, I think just recently back from the Justice
committee. I don't know if you had a chance to have a look at that at all, but if
you did, whether you thought that
that particular concern around definitions would be
addressed in some way by that piece of legislation.
I've only just looked up Section 98D today and
can verify that it is not overruled.
It still very clearly states what the definition of trafficking is.
It is not designed to protect victims of trafficking.
And it does not include-- I've received the
protocol, which was actually really helpful because it's not publicly available.
It's a 10-page protocol that was signed in 2021
pertaining to the steps that the police and immigration should both be
partaking in when anything is reported.
I can absolutely guarantee there is no way that that could happen
when any reports of trafficking are data converted into
information and then immediately closed without any steps of
investigation. And I'm concerned that this bill, without having
mandatory and publicly available protocol with
safety measures to ensure that there are
independent
oversight, that the same will not be the case with
modern slavery or trafficking. The fact that it is the police
officers that can determine how a report is immediately
converted and filed without any investigation continues to be a serious
oversight and something that, at this time, when you're amending this
bill, you have the opportunity to mandate, including the involvement
of the ministers responsible for those portfolios.
And I think there should be more responsibility and accountability, because it's
not that people aren't aware of it, as per the minister for corruption at the
moment. She's clearly been quoted on iHeartRadio, being aware that the
concerns are from the people at the frontline.
But no one appears to have been fired.
Everyone appears to continue to be on the payroll.
And so the situation as it stands, what I would
refer to as organized crime, continues.
Thank you. Okay. Thank you very much, Taz, Tanya.
We appreciate you being part of this process, your written submission and your oral
submission as well.
Thank you for your patience and my acoustics in the background.
Oh, no. Look, it actually did not come across at you.
Yeah, there was no interruption.
Oh.
All good. All good from here.
Is it the cat or the dog?
No, it's a baby.
Ah, a baby.
Just trying to work that out.
I can relate, Taz. That was me about six or eight months ago, trying
to do that below the Zoom camera, so
Yeah. It's fun times. Fun times. So thank you for your patience with me and your
compassion. I'm really looking forward to seeing how this bill comes out, so
thank you.
Appreciate it. Thanks, Taz.
Have a good evening. Thanks.
Move on now to our next submitter. Welcome.
We have Carina Brown from E Tu. We have 10 minutes with
you. Carina, you can assume that your submission has been
read, and that 10 minutes includes time for questions.
Awesome, thanks. I just want to-- Yep. Great.
Thank you for giving us time to have this conversation.
As I said, we fully support the bill.
We just think this needs a bit of strengthening to actually make it
better than it
possibly can. And one of those ways is around the
threshold of a large company. At the
moment, it's at 100 million. It actually doesn't meet
the same. The financial threshold of a large company is 33 million,
and we feel that it should actually be reduced to actually meet it in the financial
threshold to define what a large company is.
And why this matters is because it's not actually simply endorsing
transparency reporting. It is pushing for the law to capture more employers and
supply chains where vulnerable and migrant workers are most exposed.
If the threshold remains high, the bill may miss exactly the kinds of contracting
labor hire arrangements where exploitation can be hidden.
And that's why we think that lower threshold would be a much
better figure. And in reaction to what the other person was talking about,
that's why we think there should be an anti-slavery commissioner.
And that is because that independence of a commissioner can help
both legal and policy commitments into practical,
sustained measures.
We also have a concern around the enforcement.
We feel it's a key weakness,
because disclosure without a strong regulatory body may become
symbolic.
Because the fines of up to 800,000 at 100 million,
that's only 0.08%. And so for them, that money-
And especially
with big supply chains, it'd be worth them actually not complying to
actually, when they have severe slavery risks.
And that is a concern, and we think there needs to be
that annual statements alone can become a compliance exercise without investigative
powers, resources, and credible enforcement.
Large entities may treat reporting as reputational risk
management rather than duty to identify and remedy exploitation,
which again impacts on the workers.
So those are a couple of things I wanted to pick out from the submission,
because I think that it's really important that this is actually a workplace issue,
not just an offshore supply chain issue.
And I think that's what's really important to us, we've got to realize it's not
just often people think that modern slavery happens elsewhere but
not here, but it does
arrive here as well, and we need to actually ensure, and that's why it's great that
this is here. And as I said, we're fully supportive of it.
We just think it could be a bit stronger to protect more workers, which of course
is E2. That's what we always want to see occurring. So yep.
So I thought a quick overview and then leave it for questions.
Great. Thank you very much, Carina.
There doesn't appear to be any questions around the table, but as you know,
not an indication of a lack of interest.
You've just covered your point very clearly, very concisely.
So we appreciate you being part of this process. Thank you.
Thank you. Kia ora.
Cool.
We will move on now to Financial Services Council of New Zealand Incorporated.
Good
afternoon,
chairs.
Kia ora. We have 10 minutes with you and Kirk,
hello.
We have 10 minutes with you both.
Hi. How you doing?
That includes time for questions and you can
consider the submission as read, highlight what you'd like us to be across
and we'll go to questions after that.
Brilliant. Thank you. Thank you, Chair. We'll crack into it.
As you say,
we're assuming the submission's read.
Just a couple of key points. There are some definitional issues we think that could
be tidied up within the bill. We've outlined those in our
submission. The definition of control,
the definition of involved in, and some ambiguity arising
from undefined terms in relation to supply chains.
But there's probably a broader
point that we'd like to make. Obviously, we support the bill.
It's great that actually it's a live
example of bipartisanship in the parliament. So, good on you for that.
One
sort of point that's relevant for financial services, and it won't just be
for the members of the Financial Services Council, which cover funds
management, life and health, but
in other relevant jurisdictions,
they've taken a proportionate, and risk-based approach to
this type of
regulation.
Noting of course, that fund managers, life insurers, and health insurers generally
have necessarily different risk profiles from businesses operating
complex physical supply chains.
So that's why they've used proportionate frameworks,
in Australia, in the European Union in a slightly different
way in the United Kingdom. So, that would be sort of our key suggestions
and, maybe, Amy, did you have anything that you would like to
add to that?
I think from a practical implementation aspect, the six
months timeframe is impractical for many operations
in regards to relying for reporting aspects.
At least 12 months would be required from that aspect, and I think that
clarity is
useful to ensure that the reporting is
clear for everyone, and also means that people can actually report from that
aspect. I also think about alignment in regards to existing
financial year, as a entity's financial year is a better
aspect rather than having it out of light and aligned to the March
31 reporting as required.
Those are the key points I had. If members have any questions?
So just to
clarify the last comment you made, so aligning it to the reporting
entity's financial year?
Yes.
Yep. Are there any questions from members?
Camilla Belich.
Thank you. Thanks, both for your submission and your written submission.
I just had a question in relation to director liability.
In your written submission, you mention
that those acting in good faith shouldn't face
disproportionate personal exposure.
If that
not acting in bad faith was a requirement, would that be
sufficient to allay your concerns with that
particular provision?
Yeah. I
think so. We'd have to have a quick look at it, but I think so.
I guess the idea was, particularly
if you think about where we're coming from, if you have that proportionate
framework, within that and what you're saying is that
those directors
are not
inherently behaving poorly, and there are a range of other regulatory
tools that are in place to manage those risks
outside of modern slavery
legislation.
Then
they would have to be very bad faith
actors. So again, I think maybe that wording might work.
Amy, do you have any thoughts on it?
Yeah, I think that's a good point in regards to how director liability works and
with other ways the sector is regulated, and as Kirk's point is that if
they were
not called out in other aspects and called out this, that would bring into other
aspects into a question from regulators aspects, whether that's FMA
or say RBNZ, et cetera.
What proportion of
your investments are in Australian companies
that have to report under the Australian
version of this? And the question leads to,
how close are you to their reporting activities around
modern slavery?
Just to clarify, Carl, are you meaning companies
who have to report in Australia or the investments that are in
Australia?
Well, I suppose companies that you invest in,
or
that you're involved in, in Australia, that have to report under
the Australian version of that.
Yeah. It's a good point, actually.
So just our membership is fairly broad based,
so there are some
businesses that will have Australian reporting obligations.
There'll be some entities that have other international reporting
obligations, actually. So one of our other points is that
insofar as they're already reporting to a certain
level in Australia-
Yeah
... if that can be recognized in New Zealand to simplify it, not to
reduce their obligations, but to acknowledge that the New Zealand
entity is probably going to be a smaller version of a much larger,
either Australian or global entity,
that will have, again, its own
reporting obligations. What we want to
say about that is it would be useful to ensure that
those New Zealand entities can have that
global connection and obligation recognized.
Thank you. Yeah, probably an unfair question on my part, because
across your membership, it's probably difficult to know the exact-
Yeah
... number of those companies. But yeah, appreciate the point that you make.
Are there any other-
Some may be reporting, and a lot of insurers have to report into Asia
markets or things like that. So there is a vast variation where
they would have that aspect that they have to do.
Great. Any final questions?
Thanks very much. Appreciate you joining us today.
Thank you.
And we'll invite our next submitter, Rachel from Fisher
Funds.
Hello.
Hello. Welcome, Rachel. We have you with us for 10 minutes.
That does include time for questions, and you can take your submission
as read, but please feel free to highlight the things that you want us to be most
aware of. Thank you.
Kia ora koutou. Ko Rachel Tinkler toku ingoa.
Ko taku tūrangamaahi ki Fisher Funds.
Ko te head of responsible investment.
So the key point I want to reinforce today is that legislation must be
the most effective, efficient, and proportionate response to the issue it's
trying to solve.
To be clear, Fisher Funds supports the bill's intent entirely, but there are a
number of details in or missing from the bill which
we believe will result in the legislation delivering a
significant regulatory burden to MIS managers, as well as other reporters,
that is not in proportion to the harm it seeks to mitigate and will
distract from achieving the purpose of the bill.
So firstly, and most importantly, which has been echoed by
the submitter before me, is that a risk-based approach must be
applied. So this means entities should build their program and
report on the most severe risks and the risks most likely
to arise in their operations and supply chains.
Second, the bill needs to be accompanied by proportionate
regulation with an identified agency properly resourced to
implement it, that will allow reporters to upskill with
each report produced.
We submit that a phased approach for MIS managers is appropriate while
our investee entity reporting capability and maturity develops.
This is a learning from the CRD regime.
Another learning from the CRD regime is that sector-specific
guidance and its timely assurance
is crucial.
Guidance will assist reporters with producing reports that are useful to the end
user, not overly complex, and most importantly, evidence the work
they are doing to achieve the purpose of the bill.
As well as ensure reporters can produce reports without using costly
consultants and lawyers to understand their obligations.
And finally, I just wanted to clarify a point from our submission.
We do support penalties to give the legislation teeth, but believe these
should be civil and focus on deliberate non-compliance.
This was obviously touched on in the previous submission as well.
This will help reduce costs and the distraction of a reasonable
assurance audit that directors will otherwise request to mitigate their
personal liability under the bill as currently drafted.
And that again, is another learning from the CRD regime.
In year one, despite audit not being required, we had to go through a very
extensive and expensive reasonable assurance audit process,
and that added a lot of that compliance burden to
the process.
So thank you for the opportunity. Happy to take questions.
Thank you. We have a question first from Camilla Belich.
Thanks very much for your written submission and for attending
today. I just had a question around due diligence.
You've said that you support that but recommend having that at
the three-year review period. I just wondered if you could say why you think that
that would be a useful thing to have at that point in time, and
also just to clarify why. Is it your position that-
It shouldn't come in before that because it needs
someone, an entity or someone formally to be responsible for that.
I just was interested on your thoughts on that point.
Yeah, I think there's a few
factors that feed into that. Certainly, a government
entity or anti-slavery commissioner being appointed ahead
of the mandatory due diligence coming in, again, to
provide that extensive guidance for companies and reporters
to make sure they're doing it properly.
We didn't want mandatory due diligence to
be included from the beginning, and that risked the bill
being thrown out altogether, because we really
believe in the importance of the bill and don't want the mandatory
due diligence piece to
inhibit its progression through the system, the process.
I think, listening to other submissions, there's a difference between
us being a first mover on this and this being our first
move in New Zealand to bring in this type of
legislation.
And somewhat ironically, mandatory due diligence does
sort of actually bring this risk-based
approach and proportionate approach that we're
submitting should be in there. That comes in through the mandatory due
diligence process, as does sort of better clarification on these
definitions and things. So,
yeah, certainly, a phased approach is still better
than not having it, but to allow
reporters to up-skill before the mandated point comes in,
and supported by the
government entity in charge and the anti-slavery commissioner, et cetera.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Right. Thank you very much. A supplementary question from Tauno Tōwaho.
Yeah. Thank you for your submission.
You had an interesting turn of phrase between being a first mover
and our first move.
Mm.
And I was wondering, just for the clarity of people watching and also
for us here, what would you say our second move or third move
would be?
I think aligning more closely with Australia should be the
second move. And obviously, right now, Australia does not
have a mandatory due diligence requirement, but that is certainly the
way it's heading.
And watching Camilla and Greg's submission to the committee, that
sort of timing was mentioned of we've got the Australian Act.
It's very clear from all the international experience that
a transparency law on its own is not shifting the dial.
However, what it has served is to bring awareness to
the issue, and to start to push towards that, I guess,
better practice of mandatory due diligence.
So then the second move, I think, for us, should be bringing in that mandatory due
diligence as well.
Great. Thank you very much. Rachel, thanks so much for the written
and oral submission. Really constructive and helpful for
our process, so we really appreciate it.
Yeah.
Great.
Kia ora.
Thank you so much. Yeah, we'll move on to our next submitter.
For our next submitter, we have Alana Chapman from 27 Seconds
who's hopefully ready early.
We are doing well for time.
Welcome, Alana.
We have 10 minutes with you this afternoon. That includes time for questions.
Please feel free to take us through the highlights of what you'd like us to
be overly aware of, and then we'll go to questions. Thank you.
Wonderful.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to
this today. My name is Alana Chapman, and together with my
husband, we co-founded 27 Seconds.
27 Seconds is a wine brand with a simple message to
raise awareness of modern slavery and support organizations working
to combat it. Our name comes from an older UNICEF
statistic estimating that 1.2 million children were
trafficked into slavery every year.
And when you break those statistics down, that equates to one person every
27 seconds. We donate our profits to
organizations working with survivors of slavery.
And we were talking with an anti-human trafficking leader, Matt Freedman,
and he actually said, "You really should change your name and
where you are donating your profits.
The key change is actually going to be in
business and legislation. Those are the most two
powerful tools to reduce exploitation at this
scale." Which is why we are so encouraged to see this bill before
Parliament.
We want to acknowledge the work that has gone into this, and we believe it's a
really important step.
One thing, and I see the person before me mention
this as well, is that we have the great advantage of coming to this
conversation later than many other countries.
And so we can look at what has worked and what hasn't worked.
And what we are proposing is that
mandatory due diligence is added.
As you heard before, Australia is a particularly useful
example.
We don't need to start from scratch.
We have the opportunity to take those lessons on board and create
legislation that is stronger and effective from the outset.
Reporting is important and transparency,
but it doesn't actually protect the people.
And that's at the heart of this bill is-
Protecting those who have
been subjected to slavery.
We recognize that implementation should be practical and proportionate for
business, and we're not suggesting perfection, nor that business can
eliminate every risk. Rather, we support the requirement that
businesses take reasonable steps to identify, prevent,
mitigate, and respond where they are found.
In our view, due diligence is what transforms
transparency into accountability and action.
We appreciate that no legislation will eliminate modern slavery
overnight. The question is not whether this bill is perfect, but whether we
can make a good bill stronger before it becomes law.
We're grateful for the work that has gone into this, and respectfully ask the
committee to consider adding mandatory due diligence before it
proceeds any further.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much, Elena. Can I just say that a number of us committee members
have gone onto your website while you've been submitting to just check out your
jewelry.
I'll check if orders have been placed.
But can I just say thank you for telling such a great story and for being
committed with the social responsibility within what you told us about.
So, we do appreciate it. I'll just check if there's any questions around the
table. There don't appear to be, but can I just say, it is not for a lack of
interest. It's always because you've been incredibly concise and
constructive with your submission, and you've left no questions for us to ask.
So can I just say thank you.
Thank you for taking action and not waiting for legislation to come in to do
something good
in this space.
Thank you.
So appreciate it.
Kia ora.
Thank you.
We'll move on
if we have not yet-- Okay, committee, look, we'll
take a small little break.
We have our final submitter for this afternoon, not for another
sort of 10 or so minutes. So I think if you'd
like, we can-
Can we-
... wait until,
4:50 even. Just-
Can we deal with him?
We could do some, if we can go on-